+++
title = 'Victron MQTT Is Simpler With Node-Red'
date = '2025-08-05'
draft = true
[params]
  featuredImage = 'svg/logo/mqtt.svg'
+++

[Victron Energy](https://www.victronenergy.com/) is a private Dutch company that makes power inverters, solar charge controllers, and various other devices associated with off-grid energy systems.  Their systems are often found in boats, RVs, vanlifer vans, and homes.  They were one of the first companies that I discovered when I began looking into power inverters.  Once I did a ton of research, I decided to go with their produts to create a couple of energy backup systems for my home.  A big part of the reason that I decided to go with Victron was that they have a philosophy close to my heart: they believe in making products that last.  The other main reason was I use Home Assistant to keep a history of all data in my house and there seemed to be an easy path forward using MQTT in Victron's products.  What I found instead was that while the MQTT offering built into Victron's products is great, its hard to use in practice.  This ultimately led me to a solution that is less noisy, more configurable, and more visible using Node-Red as an inbetween, MQTT pseudo-broker instead builtin MQTT service.

How did I get here?  During a recent power outage, I noticed that one of my uninteruptable power supplies (UPS) shut down with the power.  It was, of couse, the one powering my two servers and not my networking gear that is much more resistant to this sort of thing.  As this is a UPS's raison d'être, I looked into what new batteries would cost since I had had this device for a 5ish years and I knew the batteries had a shelf life.  I didn't like what I found.  The solid lead-acid (SLA) batteries the UPS used were expensive, short lived, and it was difficult to find non-generics.  I knew that battery technology had been improving dramatically recently, so after much searching, I figured out that I should be able to create my own UPS using off-the-shelf components for less than it would cost from one of the big vendors for a "proper", enterprise UPS.  I got to work creating a test system for another project that I had been meaning to tackle for years: a battery backup for my home's sump pump.  I did this first for a number of reasons:

- If it failed, it wouldn't be failing for computer systems that need constant power.  A sump pump will be fine for a couple of minutes without electricity in almost all cases.
- The damage done by not having a sump during torrential rains could easily be greater than my servers having a hard power off (i.e. cost of new basement > cost of 2 servers).
- The backup system would be able to backup my homes's furnaces in the winter during a power outage.  The previous winter had an extended (8 hour) outage during a particularly cold spell and my house can have pipes freeze when it's well below freezing.
- There were fewer roadblocks in completing this sump backup system since I wanted to drywall the server closet before continuing.

Given that I had decided to go with a Victron Multiplus II inverter, I purchased a nearly-necessary device called the Cerbo GX for monitoring the system's components.  It's basically a little ARM computer with an ESP32 module for Bluetooth and WiFi running Victron's custom, OpenEmbedded Linux distribution.  I didn't want to spend any more money on one of their nice screens that go with it since I was already going to spend too much money on the aluminum T-track for the cabinet and the breaker panel kit-out, and somewhat pointless LED lighting.  This obviously meant that I needed a good way to get this data into Home Assistant so that I could use it instead for visual monitoring.  Victron's documentation claimed that I could enable MQTT directly in the Cerbo GX device, so I thought all I would have to do was enable it and configure some annoying MQTT device YAML files in Home Assistant to digest the necessary topics.  I had done similar things before and this didn't seem any harder.

Well, while I was testing the system on my workbench, I enabled MQTT and started trying to peek around at the topics to see which ones I wanted to use.  I quickly figured out that the Cerbo GX didn't use an MQTT broker, it was an MQTT broker.  It runs a Mosquitto broker server right on the device.  This meant that I first got to figure out how to republish from the Cerbo GX to my broker in Home Assistant.  This was complicated by the fact that I was testing the EMQX add-on at the time to see if I wanted to switch away from Mosquitto for some Erlang visibility goodness.  After giving up with EMQX for "I hate this configuration" reasons and going back to Mosquitto for simplicity, only negative opinions had been formed.  However, the Home Assistant broker was republishing Cerbo GX broker, so I thought I was through the worst of it.

It was time to start exploring the available information in MQTT.  The first program that I used was MQTTX from EMQ since I did like their Home Assistant add-on even if I didn't end up using it.  It was an Electron app, so when it bogged down and consumed all the memory on my machine (64GB by the way!), I just chalked it up to Electron and looked for something else.  Next I tried MQTT Explorer, an older piece of software that I had used before with some success.  It was annoyingly hard to install on Fedora Linux, but I think I eventually installed the Snap version, or AppImage, or Flatpak, I don't remember or care.  Anyway, that bogged down just as bad as MQTTX once I subsribed to the Cerbo GX's MQTT topics.  At this point, I finally figured out that the Cerbo GX was publishing on what seemed like thousands of topics every second.  The MQTT exploring software just couldn't keep up and the GUI would become unusable after a couple of seconds.

I was a little annoyed at this point.  How was I going to figure out which topics to subscribe to?  By guessing?  By reading forums and hoping someone posted about the topic path?  Hell no, I'm an engineer, I don't do that.  It was time to dig in and figure this out...so I decided to proceed with building the final system and to figure this out later.

A couple of weeks later, it was done, working, and I had to get back to this annoying topic so that I could set up my system in Home Assistant.  I had decided that using the MQTT broker in the Cerbo GX wasn't a good time, so I toyed with using Modbus over TCP/IP instead (seemed annoying), and eventually did find a good example of a Home Assistant integration of Victron's MQTT which allowed me to get pretty much what I wanted from MQTT.  I didn't love it, but it kinda worked...until I wanted the battery BMS's state of charge in addition to the system state of charge (yes, they are different and I cared to know the difference).  I didn't know the topic name.  Back to the same problem mentioned above, to try to find this topic would be a painful, long process.

I had read a number of times that you could use Node-Red with the Cerbo GX.  I knew of Node-Red through Home Assistant.  I had glanced at it years ago as a way to make automations and decided to give the builtin automations a try first.  I never went back because I could do everything that I had wanted with the Home Assistant automations, albeit with some awful YAML configuration and templating at times.  But hey, they worked, and adding software to a system is adding a new world of failure points, so I never investigated further.  Since nothing else was getting me anywhere, I decided to give it a try this time.  You have to actually install a different version of the Victron OS, the "large" version, to use Node-Red, so I did that and spun it up.  This part of the process was painless and everything on Victron's side worked the first time.  Everything could be done using the web-GUI of the Cerbo GX.

Since I had never used Node-Red before, I had to go through learning a bit about it.  I am a programmer by trade.  My perspective, I am sure, is different from non-programmers.  I spend more time in the weeds trying to figure out how things work, what's atomic, and how to structure data.  My initial impressions weren't good or bad, it was new, mildy interesting, and being a visual persion, seeing the flow and state of the automations was a nice feature.  It was limited in what it could express, but it had a funcion node that allowed for straight Javascript, meaning that I could just write some code if I got annoyed with the available features.  After some initial toying around (i.e. failing miserably over and over to effectively write an if-else-statement), I figured out that it was extremely easy using Node-Red to search through the Victron system information, to see it's current value, and to publish this information using my existing Mosquitto MQTT broker within Home Assistant.  Finally, I seemed to be getting somewhere.

I settled on this high-level architecture:

- Global state to keep track of the current values of all data points of interest.  I used Node-Red's concept of globals to do this.  Basically, the Victron state update writes its value to the global state then triggers any other flows that care if there was a state update.  This allows the state to be managed in one place.
- MQTT updates trigger, at most, every second for any state update.  The whole state object is sent on an update.
  - Home Assistant can purge repeats
  - Removed the need for separate topics for each state update
- MQTT device discovery command topic added for easy device configuration
  - All sensors are configured out-of-the-box in Home Assistant
  - Inverter mode and grid current limits can be set
  - Switches are added to enable/disable automations
- Other automations can be handled directly within the battery backup systems
  - Created automation to cycle the batteries weekly
  - Created automation to turn on cabinet lights when cabinet door is opened

This leads to a clean implementation in Node-Red where I can easily see what is going on at any moment and add new data points with minimal configuration.  I just have to add the new data to the global state and define it in the device config.  The entire device is defined in one node in a JSON object within Javascript code.  This might be the first time that I am happy to be programming in Javascript.  The MQTT updates are just for the data points that I care about and are limited to only once per second (or any other value that I like).  It's so much cleaner and keeps all the configuation for the battery backup in the backup system itself.

My current setup now has this flow of information: Cerbo GX dbus -> Node-Red -> MQTT broker -> Home Assistant.  The only niggling concern with this setup is: what if Node-Red crashes?  My answer after only a couple of weeks is that it has been rock solid.  The only problems that I have encountered, so far, were self-inflicted, networking heartaches (I think I found a bug in Ubiquiti's new policy firewall, but hell if I could reproduce it after fixing it).  Only time will tell.  The Cerbo GX is also web-accessible through my local network, so there is a fallback monitoring method and I can restart Node-Red through there if needed.  After struggling with this system for a couple of weeks, I am happy with this setup.  All of my data is being logged in Home Assistant and basically every aspect of the data stream is configurable by me through Node-Red.

A quick note: I tried the Home Assistant Node-Red palette (plugin) and found it slow and cumbersome within Node-Red on the Cerbo GX.  One explaination for this is the power of the Cerbo GX itself, I don't know what's in it other than an ESP32 chip for WiFi/Bluetooth.  I also later found out that I had some firewall problems, so that might have been contributing.  Once I figured out MQTT device configuration, I didn't see the point of the palette and removed it.  It requires a token, a bunch of configuration, was a lot slower, and failed a lot more than the MQTT nodes buit into Node-Red.  I'm not saying don't use it, it's probably the best way to add certain things directly into Home Assistant without configuring Home Assistant, but I'd approach it skeptically since it seems a little flakier than just publishing on MQTT topics.  I've now used this palette within the Home Assistant add-on and it works great there.  It's all running on the same machine and pre-configured out of the box, so it's just a better experience.

In summary, my position is this: Using Node-Red within the Cerbo GX to publish information though MQTT is a cleaner way to publish from the Victron system than trying to consume the buitin MQTT data directly.  Using this method, we can have complete control of the information being published, can easily search what information is available, see the real-time state, create a device configuration for the system, and expand into other automation that only affect the Victron system.  Node-Red is a quality product, and using it within the Cerbo GX allows for much greater expression of the Victron ecosystem.
